Good afternoon, everybody,
and welcome to our session on
OpenGL ES Tools and Techniques.
I'll be taking you through
the great new tools we have
for developing games on iOS.
Now, as you know, iOS is a great platform
for developing games.
And with OpenGL ES,
you have great technology
for pairing these games.
Today, we're going to be talking about
the OpenGL ES tools we give you to
streamline that and make sure that you're
spending your time developing games,
not finding issues in your graphics.
So what we're going to cover today.
Obviously, we'll talk about what
OpenGL ES tools are available to you,
why you need these tools,
and what new features are available to
you within Xcode 4.5 and the iOS 6.0 SDK.
Finally, we'll talk a little about some
workflows and methods to help you
get the most from these tools.
So first, let's kind of talk about what
tools are there for you within the
shipping SDKs to catch everybody up.
So the first tool I want to talk
about is the OpenGL ES Frame Debugger.
Now, this is a great tool that's
built right into Xcode.
You just launch your app
as you normally would,
trigger a frame capture,
and then you can start diving straight
away into your OpenGL ES code.
Within the debug navigator,
we show you all the
GL calls from your frame.
And you can select any of those
calls to instantly see what the
state of GL is at that point.
We also provide a debug label,
a debug marker extension, sorry,
that helps you annotate
your frame itself.
So you can group using this API calls
into your different rendering
passes or different objects you're
drawing or however you choose to.
It's a really powerful API to let
you choose how you want your frame to
appear within that debug navigator.
As well as being able to see
all your calls within there,
you can disclose any of these
calls and we'll show you what the
CPU call stack was at that point.
So you can dive straight back
to your CPU code from your
GL draw calls or state calls.
Within the main render buffer view,
editor view,
we show you your frame buffer.
So we'll show you what the
state of that frame buffer is
at whatever call you're at.
Within this,
we'll show you the color buffer,
desk buffer, stencil buffer,
whatever buffers you
happen to have enabled.
We'll also, by default,
highlight the current
draw call in wireframe.
So it makes it really easy to
see what you're drawing when
as you scrub through the frame.
In the assistant window,
we show you all of your GL objects.
So you can investigate the
resources you're using.
By default, we'll show you what the
boundary sources are,
i.e.
what are the textures,
programs that you're drawing
with at that current draw call.
But there's also options to
filter to view all of the objects.
So if you think,
I should be drawing with this texture.
But it's not bound.
Well, let's dive in and look.
I can look through all the textures,
see if I actually loaded it or not.
So I'm going to go ahead and do that.
As well, you can double-click on any of
these resources and we'll give you
a detailed view of that object,
be it a texture, a vertex array object,
and your GLSL code within your programs.
We'll also have viewers for buffers
and all the other GL objects.
Similar to the debug marker
extension I mentioned for
annotating your frame trace,
we also have a GL label
object marker extension,
which is great for
labeling your resources.
It's easy to tell what text
is which from the thumbnails,
but obviously with your programs,
your vertex array objects,
you've just got the GL name,
which is an integer, without using this.
But with this, you can give a text label
for all your resources,
and you can instantly see, oh,
this is the mesh for drawing a teapot,
this is the mesh for drawing a cat,
whatever.
Within the variables view area,
where you should be familiar
to seeing your CPU variables,
we'll show you your GL state,
and we'll show you all
your context state,
your object state,
and the renderer capabilities as well,
so things like what
GL extensions are available.
We even summarize the state,
so we'll group related
state into a category.
We'll say, for instance, in this example,
depth, so that if you're quickly
scanning through all your state,
you don't need to individually pick out,
oh, state depth this, depth that.
We'll give you it in a single line.
And as you step through,
we'll highlight what state has
changed since the last draw call.
So as you're stepping through,
you can see how you're building
your state vector up and quickly
spot where you're setting something
that you weren't intending.
The next tool I briefly want to cover
is the OpenGL ES analyzer instrument.
Now, you should all be well
familiar with instruments.
For all your profiling needs.
And the analyzer instrument is another
rich instrument within that toolkit,
giving you graphical representation
of GL performance data.
And like all the other instruments,
you can use any combination of
the instruments to solve the
issue you're trying to look.
So you can have the analyzer
instrument alongside CPU profiling,
network access, whatever you choose.
And as you can see here,
we've got all the normal
great graphs and visualization
options within the instruments.
Even more interesting, though,
are some of the detailed
views that we give you.
So, for instance, within the
OpenGL ES API Statistics window,
we'll give you a list of
all the GL calls you make,
how many times you make them,
and how much time you spent inside them.
This is great for diagnosing if
you're spending a lot of time in
state calls or in drawing calls,
as you probably more expect.
And we'll even tell you how much time
you're spending in each one on average,
so you can check whether certain calls
are taking an inordinate amount of time.
In this example, for instance,
you can see that generateMipMap
does take a long time,
but then you should only be calling that
during your initialized code anyway.
An even more interesting view within
this window is the OpenGL ES Expert.
The OpenGL ES Expert is like having
an expert in your Mac for you,
diagnosing your GL ES app.
It runs a rich set of heuristics
to detect a plethora of
GL errors and GL best practices.
So it'll tell you if
you're passing... You know,
illegal enums to GL.
But it'll also tell you if
you're doing things that might
not be particularly performant,
be it using an inefficient texture
format or inefficient vertex formats,
or making successive
redundant state calls,
things like that.
It's great for giving you a list
of all the things that you can and
should fix within your GL code.
Thank you.
The last tool I want to recap is
the OpenGL ES Performance Detective.
The Performance Detective is a standalone
app giving you an easy way to do
quick profiling of your OpenGL ES app.
To use it, it's very simple.
Just select the app you want to launch,
and it will launch it on your device.
And then you want to wait until
the point where the performance
on your app is not what you want.
So you probably want to
get through your menu code,
through the loading of your scene,
and then dive in.
And, you know, look at the frame rate,
see when it's not running
as quickly as you want,
and trigger an investigation.
At that point,
the performance detective takes
over and captures a frame of
your app's OpenGL ES and all
the textures that you're using,
all the state, et cetera.
We'll then replay that frame back
on the device thousands of times,
each time reconfiguring the graphics
pipeline in a different way.
This lets us isolate particular
possible bottlenecks.
It's very similar to the steps an
experienced OpenGL ES developer might
do over the course of an afternoon.
But with the
OpenGL ES performance detective,
it's done for you in
just a couple of minutes.
Once done,
it'll come back with a report telling
you what is the predominant performance
bottlenecks in your OpenGL ES code.
In this example,
it's telling us that we're
fragment shading bound,
and it's giving us a set of advice
as to how we could address that.
But I suspect the real reason
you're here today is to find out
what's new for OpenGL ES debugging
in Xcode 4.5 and the iOS 6.0 SDK.
Well, we've got a great list of features,
and let's skip through the list and
just start by diving into the first one.
Shader, Edit, and Continue.
Now, you might have seen a preview
of this during the graphics
and games kickoff yesterday.
It's a really, really great feature.
Now, when you've done a frame capture
within the OpenGL ES frame debugger,
you can dive straight in and
start editing your GLSL code.
Then you just hit the Update button,
and we'll send that GLSL code
back down to the device,
compile it,
and find out if there's any errors.
You'll get the errors reported
in line in your GLSL code,
just like you would do your
CPU code when you compile that.
Hopefully, though,
you won't get any errors, and instead,
you'll see the effects of the
shader straight away within
the main render buffer view.
Now, obviously,
as you're often doing a sequence
of changes as you're trying
to tweak performance or tweak
the effect you're looking for,
so we save all these changes
to a shader edit log,
which you can find in the log navigator.
At that point,
you can always scan back to
find a version that you'd made
partway through when you think,
oh, I'd really nailed it, and then, oh,
I didn't like those later changes.
And when you resume your app,
you will see the shaders
inserted back into your app,
your live running app.
So you can tweak, resume, tweak, resume,
instantly iterating to get
the performance and the
shader quality that you want.
Our second new feature that
we're talking about today is
the integrated OpenGL ES Expert.
Now, as I was mentioning with
the OpenGL ES Analyzer,
the Expert is a fantastic tool for
finding errors in your GL code.
Well, now you don't need to step out
and jump into instruments to get
the benefit of this technology.
We run it for you every time you
catch a frame in the debugger.
This is great for helping you
catch bugs early and often.
Hit frame capture,
wait for the capture to complete,
and any issues that existed will now
appear in Xcode's issue navigator,
giving you the familiar method of
navigating any issues and letting
you jump straight to the code.
There's no need to call
GL get error all the way,
dot it through your code,
trying to track errors yourself.
We call that every single
time we capture a GL command.
So you get the benefit of
us automatically calling GL.
We can get error every place.
And, as I mentioned,
because it's in the issue navigator,
you simply click on the issue and it'll
take you straight to your CPU code where
you're calling GL in a way you shouldn't.
In this case, for instance,
we can see that it's calling GL text
image with some wrong parameters.
Great way of finding errors quick,
fixing them, and getting back to what you
were meaning to be working on.
Our third new feature is
multi-context debugging.
Now, we've heard from a lot of you that
you're starting to bring the use of
multiple GL contexts into your apps,
particularly for having a background
context for streaming in resources,
predominantly textures.
Well, we've now brought support for
showing you these context switches
back into the debug navigator.
So as you see in this example,
we can see the switches of
context highlighted in between
the commands they're calling.
It's a great way of quickly
diagnosing multi-context issues
and threading issues in your code.
As well as that,
we've extended Eagle Context,
adding a new debug label property,
which lets you set a text
label on your context,
similar to how you can already
set a text label on your thread.
And if you do that,
we'll pick up that label and use
that within the debug navigator.
So you can quickly say, ah,
that's my render context,
that's my background text you'll edit.
The fourth new feature we're talking
about is Save and Load Captured Frames.
This is another one that a lot
of you have been asking us for.
Now, when you're in the frame debugger,
if you want to save your capture,
you can quickly do that.
Save your frame capture
and pick it up later.
It means that, you know,
if you're in a rush and you don't have
time to look at this particular issue,
you've got this other thing to look at,
you save it for later.
Or you can save it and load
it back on a different device.
Now, in that case, obviously,
it needs to be a compatible device.
If the GL extensions aren't available
on the device you're trying to
replay that were when captured,
it won't work.
But we'll tell you about that,
and it'll give you a warning to tell you,
not this device, sorry.
But at least you can,
with any compatible device,
load it and start debugging
where you left off.
You can also, if you choose,
send the captures to somebody else.
So if you think you've found a
bug and it's not in your code,
in the code of the graphic,
like the guy in the office next door,
you can send it to him.
Or if you think the artists are
using ridiculously big meshes
for something that's far away,
and you want to send them a frame
capture to prove it to them,
you can send that.
Fifth up is performance monitoring.
Now, with games,
performance is a first-class bug.
So we've made it easy for you to always
see how quick your app is running.
You don't need to do
anything to your app.
You don't need to do anything
to the settings in Xcode.
Now you get an FPS tray
if you're using OpenGL ES.
And we'll even highlight in
red if you're running slow.
And we pick up the frame rate
you're telling CA DisplayLink that
you're trying to run.
So if you're running along nicely at
30 and that's what you're aiming for,
we're not going to tell you that's bad.
We're not going to show that in red.
You'll be good.
Best of all,
if you click on the performance tray,
we'll show you in the main editor
window some extra GPU utilization
and frame timing information.
So in this case,
we can see the sample I captured
fully maxing out the GPU almost,
95% utilization,
reflected as well in the fact
that it's taking 32 milliseconds
to draw each frame on the GPU.
But we can also see that
we're only actually using 6
milliseconds per frame on the CPU.
So we could add some really cool physics
or whatever we chose to at that point.
On the flip side,
we also know that there's no point
tuning our CPU at this point.
It's not going to get us
any performance improvement.
We really need to start
working on the GPU performance.
Which leads us into our next new feature,
the integrated
OpenGL ES Performance Detective.
We've taken the standalone
OpenGL ES Performance Detective app and
instead brought it fully into Xcode.
So now, when you capture a frame
using the frame debugger,
you just need to press a button
and we'll do all the performance
work that was performed formally
within the Performance Detective.
As well as that,
once you've got the performance
report from the performance detective,
you're now in the debugger with
the frame for which it's given
you the performance information,
and you can start diving in and query it,
looking at, oh, you know,
it says I'm texture-bound.
Well, yes, this texture is 2K by 2K,
and I'm sampling it in a weird way.
That's probably the issue.
Or, hey,
it says I'm fragment shader-bound.
Let's look at my shaders.
You're right there where you want to
be once you've got the information.
Furthermore,
we have this feature we're calling
OpenGL ES Performance Analysis 2.0.
We've radically reworked how
the performance analysis engine
behind the detective works,
and now we can detect many,
many more bottlenecks.
A particular error improvement
is now we can detect
CPU bottlenecks within OpenGL ES.
So if you're doing things within
your GL commands that are causing
the driver to spend a lot of time
processing state or uploading textures,
we'll detect that.
And we'll tell you, hey,
your state validation
time is maxing you out,
or you're spending too much
time uploading textures.
This should be particularly valuable
for you guys who might be using some
of these 2D sprite engine middlewares,
which tend to be quite often heavy.
They use swapping state a lot.
If it tells you there that your
state validation time bound,
maybe it's time to start looking
at whether you can sort by state to
minimize the amount of state changes
and minimize the number of draw calls.
We'll also, as I said,
detect more GPU bottlenecks.
And again, we'll detect your target frame
rate from CA DisplayLink to
tailor the recommendations
the analysis engine gives you.
We're not going to tell you, hey,
you're bottlenecked by F.
if you're in fact running
at your target frame rate.
And another advantage of bringing
the performance analysis into
Xcode is we can join it up with the
GL expert that we brought into Xcode.
So now,
if there's commands in your GL stream
or issues in your GL command usage
that is relevant to the bottlenecks
that performance analysis finds,
we can tell you about it.
So if it tells you you're
fragment shader bound,
we can say, hey, this shader is using
dependent texture reads.
You might want to look at that.
This shader is using
diamond outflow control.
That might be slowing you down.
You don't have to hunt for
what your issue is now.
It all joins together.
And that leads us on to
our eighth new feature,
find your slow shaders.
Now, if you're shader-bound,
we'll run a set of additional experiments
on each of your fragment shaders to
determine which is your slow shader.
From there, you can jump straight to the
GLSL code for that shader
just by clicking on the link.
And from there,
you've got the Shader Edit and
Continue feature that you already know.
So you can start tweaking
your performance,
changing the shader, and seeing how that
affects your performance,
how it changes your scene instantly.
At this point, let's skip from talking
and jump to a demo.
I'll give you a tour of
some of these new features.
Okay, so our app's just
launching on our device.
Let's flip to that.
As you can see here,
I'm showing the light pre-pass demo
that you might have seen a little
during the games and graphics demo.
This is a really cool deferred
lighting app with the great sort
of rotating fairy lights giving
some really cool lighting effects.
And if I flip back to Xcode and
flip to the debug navigator,
you'll see here in the...
in the Debug Navigator
that we have our FPS.
In this case, I'm running a nice,
smooth 30 frames a second.
And if I flip to that,
you can see that at this point,
I'm maxing out the device,
but at 30 frames a second,
so it's nicely balanced.
And also see, yeah,
we're hitting 32 milliseconds
per frame on the GPU and 6
milliseconds per frame on the CPU.
So at this point,
if we wanted to dive in more,
we need to take a frame capture.
So I'll just quickly flip back.
to the app.
And there's a couple of ways
I want to show you about how
you can trigger frame captures.
One really great way,
particularly if you're wanting
to trigger at a particular point,
is to add a breakpoint.
And then if you...
Option click and edit breakpoint.
You can set a debug action
to trigger a frame capture.
And you can even use some
conditional breakpoint there
if you want to trigger a very,
very specific point.
This is great if you're wanting
to transition -- you know,
get a frame capture at a transition
from one scene to another or when
you're starting some particle
effect or something like that.
For this part of the demo,
we'll instead use the most simple
method of just clicking the frame
capture button here on the debug bar.
So at this point,
we've paused the application,
and we're pulling down all the
resources from the device and
recording all of the calls that we
make during the sequence of the frame.
And then in just a brief second,
you'll see we pop up
within the frame debugger.
Now,
the first thing I want to highlight is if
we look up here in the activity monitor,
it shows us that there's
a couple of issues,
a couple of errors, in fact.
Well,
let's take a look at those straight away.
Errors are bad.
Let's look at them.
So now you see in the navigator,
we've switched to the issue navigator,
and it's listing two GL errors.
And if I click on that,
it takes me straight to the code.
And as I showed before, you know,
GL text image 2D and
some wrong parameters.
So at this point,
I could just edit the code straight away,
hit stop, resume.
But for now,
we'll just keep going with the tour,
and I'll leave the bugs
for somebody else to fix.
If I flip back to the debug navigator,
you'll see I can highlight the new
context markers within the frame trace.
They're both the render context,
background, texture loader,
and then switching back
to the render context.
And it's also highlighting
what thread I'm calling on.
So in this case,
you can see I'm failing in respect
to my background texture loader
by doing it on the same main
thread as the render context.
A great way for doing the background
texture loading with minimal
effort is to use a GLKit API for
asynchronous texture loading.
Now, if I disclose any of these groups,
you can see that within the groups,
there's more GL calls.
This is because I've used
the GL push group marker,
pop group marker API that
I mentioned earlier.
It's a great way for giving that
semantic detail to your frame trace.
And as I mentioned before,
if I disclose any of these calls,
I can jump back to the CPU code
where I made any of the GL calls.
This is really great for sort of,
you know, you highlight,
you find your error
using the GL debugger,
then you can dive straight back
to where that bug is in your
code and fix it there and then.
So down here in the variables view area,
we have, as I mentioned earlier,
the GL state.
And we can see at this point that
I'm showing the... that the depth
has been changed since the last call.
And if I disclose, I can see that,
for instance,
the thing that has changed since the
last draw call was the depth write mask.
This highlighting of what's
changed since the last call is
really great for figuring out,
oh, this should be just the
same as the last call,
but this one thing's different.
That could be what's wrong.
And we do the same status coloring
within the bound GL objects as well.
So if you disclose, for instance,
the vertex array object,
I could go in and see
what's changed about my VL.
And I can see that I've switched to
a different VAO since the last call.
But in this case,
it's telling me that the real difference
is I've switched to a different VAO.
Now, up here in the main render view,
we show, as I mentioned,
what the current buffers
are at that point.
And I can toggle between
hiding and showing wireframe.
But I need to be at a draw call
where I'm drawing something for
that to have much of an effect.
Now, if I zoom in,
you can see that as I zoom in,
both the color and the depth
buffer zoom in in synchronization.
And if I pan,
both buffers pan in synchronization.
This means that if you're inspecting
a part of your color buffer,
trying to figure out
why is this drawn here,
why is that not drawn there,
you're looking at the same
part of each buffer in unison.
I can also just flip to just
show the color buffer as desired.
Now, over here in the Assistant area,
as I mentioned, we show you the bound
GL objects by default.
But you can also flip to all GL objects,
and you can even choose to say
filter to show me only the programs.
And as I mentioned before,
it really makes it a lot easier if
you use a debug label extension to
label your programs as you wish.
There's a great first step, for instance,
for labeling your textures or just
label them with the file name.
But if you want to get smarter,
you can use whatever sort
of semantic labels you want.
Thank you.
Because we're harnessing the power
of the Assistant view within Xcode,
you can open as many
Assistant windows as you want
until you run out of screen space.
But as I'm sure you're all going to be
picking up the new Retina MacBook Pro,
you're going to have a lot
of screen space to play with.
Now, a great additional view
we have within this API,
within the assistants, is the stack view.
This lets us view the CPU code at
the current draw call and tracks
automatically as you step through.
So if I start stepping through
the frame using the step markers,
you can see the wireframe
showing me where I am,
and you can see the CPU code
tracking where I am.
This is great for knowing what
you're doing at any point.
Anyway, let's close that for now and get
some more screen space back and
flip back to the bound GL objects.
If I double-click on the texture view,
I can see the texture in detail.
And you can see in this case,
I've got a texture with a lot of mipmaps.
And I can choose to view a
particular level as I wish.
And as before,
there's zoom and flip and rotate.
It's really great for flipping
your texture whichever way you
want to see how it's coming in.
You can also directly navigate
between resources using the navbar.
That's a great way to flip quickly
from one resource to another.
If I flip, for instance, to the VAO,
you can see that we've got a nice,
simple VAO, in this case,
drawing the fairies with just
position and color bound.
The last editor I want to show you in
this section is the Program Editor,
where we can jump to
either the Fragment Shader,
or the Vertex Shader.
Now let's just resize this to give
us a little bit more room as we're
using the super big presentation font.
Here you can see that for
this particular draw call,
I'm using where I'm
drawing the fairy lights.
If I flip back to the vertex shader view,
I can start editing the shader code.
And in this case,
because we're drawing point sprites,
you can see that here we're setting
the point sprite size in GLSL code.
So I can simply edit that to
make the point sprites 10 times
the size and update the program.
Well, here we can see instantly that
I don't really know what I'm doing.
I've got an error in my GLSL code.
Well, it's telling me exactly what it is.
Divide does not operate on int and float.
So let's fix that by putting a 0,
a double point 0 on the end to make
it float by float and update again.
Now, let's flip the wireframe off.
We can see our scene is instantly
updated with the change from that shader.
Now, the point sprites are much bigger.
And I like that effect.
It's kind of cool,
but I think we want to make
it a little smaller because
it's a bit too psychedelic.
So let's flip it down to half
that size and update again.
That's much nicer.
Well, now,
if I switch-- if I resume the app,
And switch back to the iPad,
you can see that those bigger
fairies are in our live running app.
Now I could start navigating
through my app as I chose,
and the effects of those
shader edits are there for me.
And you can edit as many
different shaders as you
want from change to change.
It's really great because now you
don't need to go through that long,
make an edit, recompile, redeploy, test.
Redeply, recompile, redeploy,
test thing for shaders.
You can tweak them quickly in place.
Really, really quick option.
So at this point,
I've exhausted the level of
my manager coding ability,
and it's time to turn things over
to a real engineer who's going to
take you through fixing some real
live issues within a version of
Light Prepass that I've broken for him.
So at this point, I'd like to welcome on
stage Michael Mayers.
Now that we have taken a tour
of the features of these tools,
let's go ahead and put them to
good use and crush us some bugs.
So I'm going to go ahead and
open up the problem project.
In this case,
we have a hobbled version of
Light Prepass like we have seen before.
And let's go ahead and boot her up.
I am now going to switch
over to the device.
So, immediately we can see
we have a few issues.
We see that the light orbs have a strange
blending artifact and the temple's
geometry is severely lacking in detail.
We can also see that the frame
rate is a little bit too low.
So let's go ahead and switch back to the
debugger and initiate a frame capture.
So I'm going to go ahead and click
the frame capture button down here.
So right now the debugger is
retrieving the sequence of
GL commands and set of resources
that compose the captured frame.
And once that is complete,
we will be shown the frame buffer that
is bound at the end of that frame.
So here we see that.
Let's go ahead and set that to auto.
We see that we have a depth buffer
bound and it looks just fine and
the color buffer looks as messed
up as it does on the device.
So now the question is, what next?
Well, when in doubt,
head over to the issue navigator,
which is over here,
and we see a laundry list of issues to
fix and two of them stand out in red.
So let's go ahead and fix one of those.
All right.
It is telling us that we are passing
an invalid enumeration into glEnable.
And those of you that have been
around the block with gl before know
that this should instead be glBlend.
So let's go ahead and fix that.
And move on to the next issue.
So next we will tackle the
temple geometry's missing detail.
And to do that, I'm going to go back
to the debug navigator.
I'm also going to bring
up the Assistant view.
And now we will scrub to the draw call
where the temple's geometry is produced.
And I'm going to employ a binary
search method when I'm scrubbing.
So I'm going to go ahead and
scrub to the halfway mark.
And now the quarter mark.
Now the eighth mark.
So we're pretty close.
Now I'm going to step--there we go.
So let's go ahead and kill the wireframe.
And reveal the draw call
in the debug navigator.
And I'm also going to hide
the depth and stencil.
So I see that the engineer that
programmed LightPrePass used
the group marker APIs,
and that is allowing me to
see that the current draw call
is within the Gbuffer pass.
And this means we should be
laying down some normals.
And what I see here does
not look like normals to me.
It looks more like a
colorized depth image.
So I want to go to the
Assistant Editor and bring up
the Currently Bound Resources.
So I see that we have a normal map bound,
which seems relevant to this normal pass.
So let's go ahead and open that
up and make sure it's okay.
So I see that there is plenty of
detail present in these normal maps
and all the MIT maps are present,
but I don't see any of these details
present in the render buffer.
So staying late in the pipeline,
I'm going to switch over to the fragment
shader and give myself some more room.
Okay, so nothing immediately stands out,
so I'm going to go old school and use
some printf style shader debugging.
And I do this by overwriting
gl_frag_color with a
variable of interest.
And right now I'm interested in v_normal,
so let's go ahead and do that.
And extend it to four dimensions.
And I will now update the shader.
So we see in the render buffer view
that it has updated itself to reflect
the changes we made in the shader.
But what I see is just an unbiased
version of what we had before.
So I'm going to move on to the
next variable and update once more.
And there is no change.
And this is highly suspicious.
So I'm going to go ahead and set
the shader back to what it was.
and collect some more evidence.
We are going to go to the
VAO view and check out the vertex
stream feeding the vertex shader.
So I see that we have one, two, three,
four, five vertex attributes,
each having three components.
And if we look a little bit closer,
we see that we have
the same data in each.
I see 9-0-5, 9-0-5, 9-0-5.
Well, this is definitely wrong.
And to investigate further,
I want to go down to the Variable
View and open up the same VAO.
I see that we have an element
buffer bound and five vertex atribs,
as expected.
Let's go ahead and open up
two of these vertex atribs.
So I see that both these ATRIBs have
the same exact setup and this suggests
that they're sourcing the same data,
which is what we can see elsewhere.
I can also note that since the stride
is 60 and the buffer binding is 1,
we are using a VBO,
that these are intended to
be interleaved vertices.
So I now have enough information
to see what is wrong.
It is the vertex-attrib setup.
So I'm going to go ahead and search
the code for all vertex-attrib setup.
So I'm going to go to the search
navigator and type in gl vertex-attrib.
We have several hits,
but the one at the top stands
out in particular because it
has the name Temple in it.
So let's go ahead and select that
and give myself some more room.
Okay, so at first glance,
this GL vertex-attrib
pointer call looks just fine.
I'm going to go ahead
and scan around a bit.
Okay, I have found a problem.
I see that we are setting the vertex
stride twice but not the vertex offset,
and this is because of
a copy and paste bug.
Well, I'm going to go ahead and
fix this copy and paste bug
with another copy and paste.
And now that we have fixed two issues,
I think it's time to rerun the
application and see where we stand.
I'm going to go ahead and
switch over to the device.
So, we have cleansed the artifacts,
but the frame rate is
still running a bit slow.
So let's go ahead and switch back to the
debugger and start another frame capture.
So again, the debugger is retrieving the
sequence of commands and set of
resources that make up the frame.
And that last bug was a little bit tough,
so this time I think we're going
to go to the issue navigator.
and pick off something that stands out.
So I am liking the logical buffer load.
I'm going to go ahead and click on that.
And it is telling us that we are not
clearing a portion of the frame buffer.
And this means that we are incurring some
additional memory traffic because the
hardware's tile renderer needs to reload
the previous contents of a given tile.
If you instead clear that,
it can initialize it
with a constant value.
This is happening, of course,
because of another copy and paste bug.
We are clearing color depth and depth,
not color depth and stencil.
So let's go ahead and fix that.
And we will rerun the
application once more.
Let's switch over to the device.
Okay, we did not quite get back the frame
rate I was hoping for with that.
So let's go ahead and switch back to
the debugger and break out the big gun.
So I am going to go over
to the debug navigator.
And we see that with the application
running live that the debug navigator
will have this performance tray,
which is currently
showing us the frame rate.
And if I click on that,
we can see a course breakdown of where
the application is spending its time.
And down here, we will see the big gun,
the Analyze Performance button.
So let's go ahead and click on that.
So like the debugger,
the performance analyzer
needs to retrieve the frame.
But once that is complete,
it will run an extensive battery
of experiments on that frame
repeatedly so that you don't have to.
And with each iteration,
it will modify the experiment slightly
to collect another data point.
Once all those data points
have been collected,
it will run them through
a series of hereafters.
modeled after an experienced
graphics developer.
And that in turn will produce
a list of issues that are
affecting your performance.
So let's go ahead and give
the analyzer a second.
Okay, so we have some results now.
It is telling us that the
performance is limited by the cost
of fragment shader processing.
And this could mean that we have too
many fragments to shade or that the cost
of each fragment is simply too great.
Give it one more second.
Okay.
The analysis is complete and it's telling
us that we are bound by the fragment
shader bound to program number three.
And if I click on that,
we will be taken to the offending shader.
And I see here that we are using a
software shadow filtering fallback path,
and we should really be using
hardware since we know that
this device supports it.
Now I'd like to make a note that
ideally this is something that should
be done at startup dynamically based
on some device selection method.
And if you need help with that,
head on down to the OpenGL ES lab
and an Apple engineer will
be happy to show you how.
For now,
let's go ahead and update this program.
And the performance analyzer
is telling me that the analysis
it just ran is now invalidated
since we've modified the shader.
And that to get new analysis,
we should rerun the analyzer.
But we're not going to do that right now.
We're just going to go ahead and
continue to see where we stand.
Okay.
And we are at 30 frames per second.
The artifacts have been cleansed.
And with that, my job is complete.
So I'm going to go ahead and
hand the torch back to Seth.
So finally,
just a few workflow recommendations to
help you get the best out of these tools.
Firstly,
always have a spare USB cable handy.
Secondly, the issue navigator,
as we showed you,
will find all the GL issues for you.
A plethora of issues,
both errors and warnings.
Fix them early,
just like you would do compiler
errors and compiler warnings.
And remember as well,
any GL errors can leave
GL in an undefined state.
So you might think that
you've got great performance,
but then when you go and fix
the one GL error that's causing
some rendering artifacts,
you might suddenly be
running at half the speed.
So, you know,
it pays to fix your GL issues early.
Remember to annotate your frame
with the push group marker,
pop group marker calls.
It makes it a lot easier to navigate
your frame within the debug navigator.
Really, you know,
the investment you put in,
just putting a few simple
annotations in there,
probably putting whatever
your mesh names are,
which you probably have
from your scene graph,
into the debug navigator makes
it so much easier to traverse.
And similarly, label your resources
with GL label objects.
Shader edit and continue,
as we talked about earlier,
is great for letting you
tweak your shaders in place.
So it's really great for making those
performance versus quality tradeoffs.
Once you've got the effect
you want looking well,
you can use it to quickly tweak
precision level or how many taps
you're taking if you're using
some funky filtering or whatever.
So, yeah, really useful for letting
you do that in place without
having to continually rerun.
And finally,
use the integrated performance
analysis to find your bottlenecks.
You know, do that.
Don't just assume you
know why you're slow.
There's this great tool built right in
Xcode now that will tell you what your
GPU or GL performance bottlenecks are.
And remember to think
about performance early.
Now, you know, premature optimization
is the root of all evil.
But on the flip side,
if you're trying to tune
gameplay in a game and it's
running at 10 frames a second,
it's really hard to get the
gameplay balance you want.
So, you know,
tune your performance early.
For more information on the tools,
ping the technology evangelists.
Both Alan Schafer and
Mike Djuravich can help you.
And remember,
the developer forums are a great
source of information as well.
So, in summary, great OpenGL ES developer
tools that just got a lot,
lot better in Xcode 4.5.
So please harness them
to make great games.
Thank you.